.. _Part2_phoas:

Higher-order Abstract Syntax
============================

In the previous chapter, we looked at a *deep embedding* of the simply
typed lambda calculus (STLC). The encoding is "deep" in the sense that
we used an inductive type to represent the *syntax* of the lambda
calculus in F*, and then defined and proved some properties of its
semantics represented mathematically in F*.

Another way to embed a language like the STLC in F* is a *shallow
embedding*. F* is itself a functional programming language, and it has
a type system that is certainly powerful enough to represent simply
typed terms, so why not use lambda terms in F* itself to represent
STLC, rather than merely encoding STLC's abstract syntax in F*. This
kind of encoding is called a shallow embedding, where we use semantic
constructs in the host (or meta) language (F*) to represent analogous
features of the embedded (or object) language (STLC, in our example).

In this chapter, we look at a particularly elegant technique for doing
this called *higher-order abstract syntax* (or HOAS). For more
background about this, a `2008 paper by Adam Chlipala
<http://adam.chlipala.net/papers/PhoasICFP08/PhoasICFP08.pdf>`_ is a
good resource, though it develops a more sophisticated parametric
version.

Our small case study in HOAS is meant to illustrate the use of
inductive types with non-trivial indexes while also containing
strictly positive functions as arguments, and also a bit of type-level
computation.

Roadmap
+++++++

The type ``typ`` below represents the types we'll use in our STLC
object language, i.e., the base types ``Bool`` and ``Int``, and
function types ``Arrow t1 t2``.

.. literalinclude:: ../code/Part2.HOAS.fst
   :language: fstar
   :start-after: //SNIPPET_START: typ$
   :end-before: //SNIPPET_END: typ$

This is analogous to our representation of STLC types in the deep
embedding of the previous chapter.

Where things get interesting is in the representation of STLC terms
and their semantics. To set the goal posts, we want to

  1. Give an interpretation of STLC types into F* types, by defining a
     function ``denote_typ : typ -> Type``

  2. Define a type ``term t``, to represent well-typed STLC
     terms whose type is ``t:typ``

  3. Give an intepretation of STLC terms in to F* terms of the
     suitable type, i.e., define a function ``denote_term (#t:typ)
     (e:term t) : denote_typ t``, proving that every well-typed STLC
     term at type ``t`` can be represented in F* as a function of type
     ``denote_typ t``.

Such a result would encompass the type soundness results we proved in
the previous chapter (proving that well-typed programs can always make
progress), but would go substantially further to show that the
reduction of all such terms always terminates producing F* values that
model their semantics.

Denotation of types
+++++++++++++++++++

Step 1 in our roadmap is to give an interpreration of STLC types
``typ`` into F* types. This is easily done, as shown below.

.. literalinclude:: ../code/Part2.HOAS.fst
   :language: fstar
   :start-after: //SNIPPET_START: denote_typ$
   :end-before: //SNIPPET_END: denote_typ$

We have here a recursive function that computes a *Type* from its
argument. This is may seem odd at first, but it's perfectly legal in a
dependently typed language like F*.

The function ``denote_typ`` The interpretation of ``Bool`` and ``Int``
are the F* type ``bool`` and ``int``, while the interpretation of
``Arrow`` is an F* arrow. Note, the function terminates because the
two recursive calls are on strict sub-terms of the argument.


Term representation
++++++++++++++++++++

The main difficulty in representing a language like STLC (or any
language with lambda-like variable-binding structure), is the question
of how to represent variables and their binders.

In the deep embedding of the previous chapter, our answer to this
questions was very syntactic---variables are de Bruijn indexes, where,
at each occurrence, the index used for a variable counts the number of
lambdas to traverse to reach the binder for that variable.

The HOAS approach to answering these questions is very different. The
idea is to use the binding constructs and variables already available
in the host language (i.e., lambda terms in F*) to represent binders
and variables in the object language (STLC).

The main type in our representation of terms is the ``term`` defined
below. There are several clever subtleties here, which we'll try to
explain briefly.

.. literalinclude:: ../code/Part2.HOAS.fst
   :language: fstar
   :start-after: //SNIPPET_START: term$
   :end-before: //SNIPPET_END: term$

First, the ``term`` type represents both the abstract syntax of the
STLC as well as its typing rules. We'll see in detail how this works,
but notice already that ``term`` is is indexed by a ``t:typ``, which
describes the type of encoded STLC term. The indexing structure
encodes the typing rules of STLC, ensuring that only well-typed STLC
terms can be constructed.

The second interesting part is the use of ``denote_typ`` within the
syntax---variables and binders at a given STLC type ``t`` will be
represented by F* variables and binders of the corresponding F* type
``denote_typ t``.

  * ``Var`` : Variables are represented as ``Var #t n : term t``,
    where ``n`` is a term of type ``denote_typ t``.

  * ``TT`` and ``FF``: The two boolean constansts are represented by
    these constructors, both of type ``term  Bool``, where the index
    indicates that they have type ``Bool``.

  * ``I``: STLC integers are represented by tagged F* integers.

  * ``App``: To apply ``e1`` to ``e2`` in a well-typed way, we must
    prove that ``e1`` has an arrow type ``TArrow t1 t2``, while ``e2``
    has type ``t2``, and the resulting term ``App e1 e2`` has type
    ``t2``. Notice how the indexing structure of the ``App``
    constructor precisely captures this typing rule.

  * ``Lam``: Finally, and crucially, we represent STLC lambda terms
    using F* functions, i.e., ``Lam f`` has type ``Arrow t1 t2``, when
    ``f`` is represented by an F* function from arguments of type
    ``denote_typ t1``, to terms of type ``term t``. The ``Lam`` case
    includes a function-typed field, but the type of that field,
    ``denote_typ t1 -> term t2`` is strictly positive---unlike the the
    ``dyn`` type, :ref:`shown earlier <Part2_strict_positivity>`.


Denotation of terms
+++++++++++++++++++

Finally, we come to Step 3 (below), where we give an interpretation to
``term t`` as an F* term of type ``denote_typ t``. The trickiest part
of such a interpretation is to handle functions and variables, but
this part is already done in the representation, since these are
already represented by the appropriate F* terms.

.. literalinclude:: ../code/Part2.HOAS.fst
   :language: fstar
   :start-after: //SNIPPET_START: denote_term$
   :end-before: //SNIPPET_END: denote_term$

Let's look at each of the cases:

  * The ``Var`` case is easy, since the variable ``x`` is already
    interpreted into an element of the appropriate F* type.

  * The constants ``TT``, ``FF``, and ``I`` are easy too, since we can
    just interpret them as the suitable boolean or integer constants.

  * For the ``App #t1 #t2 f a`` case, we recursively interpret ``f``
    and ``a``. The type indices tell us that ``f`` must be interpreted
    into an F* function of type ``denote_typ t1 -> denote_typ t2`` and
    that ``denote_term a`` has type ``denote_typ t1``. So, we can
    simply apply the denotation of ``f`` to the denotation of ``a`` to
    get a term of type ``denote_typ t2``. In other words, function
    application in STLC is represented semantically by function
    application in F*.

  * Finally, in the ``Lam #t1 #t2 f`` case, we need to produce a term
    of type ``denote_typ t1 -> denote_typ t2``. So, we build an F*
    lambda term (where the argument ``x`` has type ``denote_typ t1``),
    and in the body we apply ``f x`` and recursively call
    ``denote_term`` on ``f x``.

If that felt a little bit magical, it's because it almost is! We've
defined the syntax, typing rules, and an interpreter that doubles as a
denotational semantics for the STLC, and proved everything sound in
around 30 lines of code and proof. By picking the right
representation, everything just follows very smoothly.

Termination
-----------

You may be wondering why F* accepts that ``denote_term e``
terminates. There are three recursive calls to consider

  * The two calls in the ``App`` case are easy: The recursive calls
    are on strict sub-terms of ``App f a``.

  * In the ``Lam f`` case, we have one recursive call ``denote_term
    (f x)``, and F* accepts that ``f x`` is strictly smaller than ``Lam
    f``. This is an instance of the sub-term ordering on inductive
    types explained earlier, as part of F*'s ``precedes`` relation,
    :ref:`explained earlier <Part1_precedes_relation>`.

For a bit of intuition, one way to understand the type ``term`` is by
thinking of it as a tree of finite depth, but possibly infinite width:

  * The leaves of the tree are the ``Var``, ``TT``, and ``FF`` cases.

  * The internal node ``App e0 e1`` composes two sub-trees, ``e0`` and
    ``e1``.

  * The internal node ``Lam #t1 #t2 f`` composes a variable number of
    sub-trees, where the number of sub-trees depends on the parameter
    ``t1``. For example:

    - If ``t1 = Unit``, then ``f : unit -> term v t``, i.e., there is
      only one child node, ``f()``.

    - If ``t1 = Bool``, then ``f : bool -> term v t``, i.e., there are
      two children, ``f true`` and ``f false``.

    - if ``t1 = Int``, then ``f : int -> term v t``, i.e., there are
      infinitely many children, ``..., f -1, f 0, f 1, ...``.

With this intuition, informally, it is safe to recursively call
``denote_term e`` on any of the children of ``e``, since the depth of
the tree will decrease on each recursive call. Hence the call
``denote_term (f x)`` terminates.

We'll revisit termination arguments for recursive functions more
formally in a subsequent chapter on :ref:`well-founded recursion
<Part2_well_founded_recursion>`.

Exercises
+++++++++

Giving a semantics to STLC is just the tip of the iceberg. There's a
lot more one can do with HOAS and Chlipala's paper gives lots of
examples and sample code in Coq.

For several more advanced exercises, based on the definitions shown
below, try reconstructing other examples from Chlipala's paper,
including a proof of correctness of a compiler implementing a
continuation-passing style (CPS) transformation of STLC.

`Exercise file <../code/Part2.PHOAS.fst>`_

.. literalinclude:: ../code/Part2.PHOAS.fst
   :language: fstar
